## Project Overview
This project classifies images of plant leaves into three categories: **Healthy**, **Powdery Mildew**, and **Rust** and attempts to segment the disease spots in the images. It features multiple custom-trained CNN models and a web-based dashboard for real-time inference. 

## Classification Performance Summary
*   **Test Accuracy:** 85.33%
*   **Validation Accuracy:** ~88-90%

The model performed very well on both validation and test data. There was a slight discrepancy between the validation and test accuracies (2.67%), likely caused by the test data containing a few images with more diverse parameters. An 85.33% test accuracy indicates the model is proficient at classifying new leaf images, while the 14.67% error rate is expected given that early-stage leaf diseases can be indistinguishable without microscopic analysis.

## Segmentation Performance Summary
*   **Dice Coefficient:** 0.81
*   **Validation Accuracy:** 87%

The U-Net model had a dice coefficient of 0.81, which should indicate that the model has acheived a high level of overlap between its predicted disease spots and the actual infected area. The 87 percent validation accuracy indicates that the model is consistently identifying the diseased leaf spots. Despite these seemingly good results, the model is unable to correctly identify many disease spots due to high amounts of background noise in the images. The U-Net model is able to replicate the masks generated by the CAE model, however, the CAE model is unable to distinguish anomalies in the leaf pattern from anomalies in the image background. Thus the masks generated from the CAE model are inaccurate.

## Technical Implementation

### Data Preprocessing
- **Source:** [Plant Disease Recognition Dataset](https://www.kaggle.com) (~1,530 images).
- **Resizing:** High-resolution ($2672 \times 4000$) images were downscaled to **$224 \times 224$** for computational efficiency.
- **Normalization:** Pixel values rescaled to a **[0, 1]** range.
- **Augmentation:** Applied random flips, rotations, and zooms to increase model robustness and prevent overfitting, since it was a smaller dataset.

### Model Architectures

###1. Classification model: A Sequential CNN consisting of:
- **3 Convolutional Blocks:** Using `Conv2D` for feature extraction and `MaxPooling2D` for spatial reduction.
- **Batch Normalization:** Integrated after each convolution to stabilize the learning process.
- **Dropout (0.5):** Applied to the dense layers to force the model to learn generalized features rather than memorizing noise.
- **Output Layer:** 3-way `Softmax` activation for multiclass probability distribution.
- **Optimizer:** Adam with a custom **low learning rate (0.0001)** to ensure smooth convergence.
- **Loss Function:** Categorical Cross-Entropy.
- **Callbacks:** Utilized `EarlyStopping` to monitor validation loss and `restore_best_weights` to capture the model's peak performance before any signs of overfitting.

###2. Convolutional Autoencoder: Used for Pseudo-Mask Generation
- **Concept:** Since the dataset lacked segmentation masks, a CAE was trained exclusively on Healthy images to learn what a healthy leaf looks like.
- **Bottleneck Compression:** The encoder was designed with a deep 14 × 14
bottleneck to force the model to ignore fine details and focus on global leaf structure.
- **Anomaly Detection:** The CAE model was trained only on healthy leaf images. The diseased images were passed through the pre-trained model and the resulting reconstruction error was used to create the pseudo-masks of disease spots.
- **Binarization:** Error maps were used to create Pseudo-Masks, providing the necessary training targets for the subsequent segmentation model.

###3. U-Net Model: Used for Disease Segmentation
- **Architecture:** A 4-level deep U-Net featuring an encoder-decoder structure with skip connections to preserve high-resolution spatial features for precise spot localization.
- **Negative Sampling:** The training set was balanced 1:1 with Healthy images assigned empty masks.
- **Hybrid Loss Function:** A custom Total Loss (BCE + Dice Loss) was implemented. Binary Cross-Entropy stabilized pixel-wise classification, while Dice Loss optimized the overlap between predicted and pseudo-labels.

## Future Modifications

The segmentation model currently does a poor job at identifying where the disease spots are in the image. I believe the strategy of using the CAE model for anomaly detection could be effective for this type of segmentation, however, I would need to use a pretrained model that already knows how to segment leaf shapes as a layer in the model. If I can find a dataset with segmentation labels, I plan to revisit this project to update the segmentation model.



## How to Use
1. **Clone the repo** 
2. **Ensure that you have Python 3.10 or 3.12 installed.**
3. **Run the following commands:**
chmod +x setup.sh
./setup.sh
